---
layout: default
title:  "Pragma Autonoumous Transactions"
date:   2021-01-21 15:21:38 -0800
categories: pl/sql, database management
excerpt: "When a function or procedure is marked as pragma autonomous, it becomes independent of the transaction that called it. Let's explore more."
---
When a function or procedure is marked as pragma autonomous, it will be independent of whatever transaction invokes it. That is to say, within a pragma autonomous subprogram you can commit or roll back changes made in that subprogram without consequently committing or rolling back changes in the transaction which called the subprogram. 

Pragma autonomous directives have practical implications for tracking changes for databases and tables. Let’s explore below.

### Scenario:

Let's suppose we have an employee table with sensitive information such as wage information or overtime rates or SIN, etc. To control access to this table, we've limited access through grants and privileges for users and/or user groups.  

*But what about monitoring changes made by privileged users?*

Well, a typical solution is to set up a trigger that will fire for updates/insertions/deletions and send some information to an audit table. 

```SQL
CREATE TRIGGER emp_update_trg
BEFORE INSERT OR UPDATE OR DELETE
ON emp_table
FOR EACH ROW
BEGIN
INSERT INTO audit_table(values);
END;

```
*However, what happens if the user does a rollback right after after making changes to this sensitive data?*

Well, unfortunately, we lose the information sent to the audit table about the changes made. This is not the most desirable outcome as we want our audit table information to persist. However, we can use a pragma autonomous subprogram to provide one potential solution.

```SQL

CREATE TRIGGER emp_update_trg
BEFORE INSERT OR UPDATE OR DELETE
ON emp_table
FOR EACH ROW
PRAGMA AUTONOMOUS_TRANSACTION;
BEGIN
INSERT INTO audit_table(values);
COMMIT;
END;
```

Note that we now mark the trigger with the key words pragma autonomous_transaction right before ‘BEGIN’. This signals that this trigger's routine is an independent transaction from it's calling transaction. 

Additionally, because we are dealing with an autonomous program, we can call a commit without causing an exception to occur. However, this commit will only apply to the insert for the audit_table BUT not for any changes external to the trigger's subroutine. In fact, if you're isolation level is set to serializable, your calling transaction will not be able to see the changes made to the audit table until it the calling transaction is completed.








