---
layout: default
title:  "Merging Data and Auditing Merge Deletions"
date:   2021-01-20 18:21:38 -0800
categories: tsql, mssql, data warehousing
excerpt: "Data merging is a common process in data warehousing - typically, used when data in a mart/warehouse needs to be frequently refreshed with data from a real-time database. User our voter dataset we demonstrate a merge."
---
Data merging is a common process in data warehousing - typically, used when data in a mart/warehouse needs to be frequently refreshed with data from a real-time database. 
Merging has advantages over the alternative of truncating tables and inserting fresh data. For example, if an ETL used the truncate-insert method and then that 
ETL failed during insertion, then you could end up in a state of empty or partially filled tables. That state can cascade into other failures such as broken views, reports,..etc.
However, merges don't rely on truncations. They use an underlying join to update record rows according to a defined merge logic.  

Using the voter datasets found [here](https://github.com/ShanNatRichards/T-SQL/tree/main/datasets), let's demonstrate a merge. 

### Scenario

There are 2 datasets: 
1. gtc_voters - Current registered voter list for particular diistrict (data is cleaned and anonymized). This would be a table in the datamart/warehouse AKA the Merge Destination.
2. gtc_voters_updated  - Contains updated registered voter information (for e.g. changes in jobtitle, changes in address, and voter deletions). This would be our Merge Source.

We want to merge our source data to the destination table in order to make the voter list up-to-date.

We also want to monitor voter deletions/purges using an audit table called voters_removed.

TLDR; Grab the complete script [here](https://github.com/ShanNatRichards/T-SQL/blob/main/merge.sql).


1. Create our audit table

```SQL
CREATE TABLE  voters_removed (id int, address varchar(100), jobtitle varchar(50), logdate DATETIME) ;
```

2. Set up merge destination and merge source 

```SQL
MERGE  gtc_voters v --destination
USING  gtc_voters_updated as src  --source
...
```

3. Define the 'merge on' condition - i.e. how we determine maches between the 2 datasets. 
   In this case, we want to merge on voter id. (Sidenote: It's good practice to set up an index for the 'merge on' fields as it will speed up query performance)

```SQL
MERGE  gtc_voters v
USING  gtc_voters_updated as src
ON v.id = src.id
...

```

4. Define the merge logic for matches between the source and destination.
   In this case, when the voter id is matched to the destination table, we update that record row in the destination table with the values from the cource table. 

```SQL
MERGE  gtc_voters v
USING  gtc_voters_updated as src
ON v.id = src.id
WHEN MATCHED AND DATEDIFF(day, v.updatedate, src.updatedate) > 0  THEN 
UPDATE SET 
		v.address = src.address,
		v.jobtitle = src.jobtitle,
  	v.updatedate = src.updatedate
...
```
5. For match clause we also included a search condition DATEDIFF(day, v.updatedate, src.updatedate) > 0 . 
   We do this to avoid updating our destination table unecessarily if the merge is run multiple times in a day but our source is refreshed once per day. 

6. Next, define the target not matched clause. That is, when a record in the source table could not be matched to a record in the destination table.
   That is, new voters! In this case, we want to insert those new records into our destination table.   

```SQL
...
WHEN NOT MATCHED THEN  ---not matched by target
INSERT VALUES (src.id, src.address, src.jobtitle, src.updatedate)
...
  
```
7. Next, define the source not macthed clause. That is to say, when a record in the destination table could not be matched to a record in the source table.
   In other words, deleted voters! You want to be careful when utilizing source not matched clause to avoid unitentionally removing data. 
   For our example, however, we will go ahead and delete those records from our destination tables. [We're going to take care of any potential issues with deletions].

```SQL
WHEN NOT MATCHED BY SOURCE THEN
DELETE
...
```
8. Finally, let's use the Output clause to return each completed merge action ( 'Update', 'Insert', 'Delete').
   Note an update involves a deletion then an insertion.

```SQL
OUTPUT $action, DELETED.*, INSERTED.* ;
```

9. Let's see what we have so far.

```SQL
MERGE  gtc_voters v
USING  gtc_voters_updated as src
ON v.id = src.id
WHEN MATCHED AND DATEDIFF(day, v.updatedate, src.updatedate) > 0  THEN 
UPDATE SET 
v.address = src.address,
v.jobtitle = src.jobtitle,
v.updatedate = src.updatedate
WHEN NOT MATCHED THEN
INSERT VALUES (src.id, src.address, src.jobtitle, src.updatedate)
WHEN NOT MATCHED BY SOURCE THEN
DELETE
OUTPUT $action, DELETED.*, INSERTED.* ;

```

10. Ok, we can run the above and it would complete the merge process for our destination and source tables. 
   However, as said previously, we want to monitor purges that result from the merge via an audit table.   
   We accomplish this by filtering the returned result set from our OUTPUT clause to provide only 'deleted' rows and then insert that result set into our audit table. 


  
```SQL

INSERT INTO voters_removed
SELECT  id, address, jobtitle, GETDATE() as logdate
FROM
(
  MERGE  gtc_voters v
  USING  gtc_voters_updated as src
  ON v.id = src.id
  WHEN MATCHED AND DATEDIFF(day, v.updatedate, src.updatedate) > 0  THEN 
	UPDATE SET 
		v.address = src.address,
		v.jobtitle = src.jobtitle,
  		v.updatedate = src.updatedate
  WHEN NOT MATCHED THEN
	INSERT VALUES (src.id, src.address, src.jobtitle, src.updatedate)
  WHEN NOT MATCHED BY SOURCE THEN
        DELETE
  OUTPUT $action, Deleted.id, Deleted.Address, Deleted.JobTitle 
) AS removals (Action, id, address, jobtitle)
WHERE Action = 'DELETE';

```

We've turned our merge statement into subquery (!), aliased as removals, with the output clause returning a result set. Nevertheless, the merge still occcurs! All we're doing is taking the extra step of grabbing info about merge deletions and 
inserting that data into our audit table. We accomplish that with an 'insert into via select' at the top of our query. 












